### General Notes

_SIEM_ or _Security Information and Events Management_ is a software that collects data from various endpoints and places them in a centralized place to perform more advanced functions such as:
- Collection and administration of logs and events.
- [[Incident Handling]].
- Visual summaries and documentation.
- [[Threat Hunting]].

SIEM systems gather data from various resources, both on the network and outside of the network.
- This data is standardized and used for analysis.
- Experts who use the SIEM observe these logs and are able to locate and identify security issues or incidents.

An _alert_ is generated when an event or incident takes place that needs to be examined by the security professional.
- Alerts are generated in large amounts due to the large amount of logs generated by the events.
- Therefore, the SIEM must be fine tuned to only alert events that are deemed risky.

---
### SIEM Functions

By serving as a central hub that collects data from various sources, SIEM solutions offer a platform to easily and efficiently manage risks and handle incidents.

##### Log Aggregation and Normalization

A SIEM has responsibilities of collections logs of various types and from various sources, and normalizing them into a single standard format.
- This process of collecting logs from various sources is known as _log consolidating_.
- This process takes place by collecting logs both from *host-centric* sources and *network-centric* sources.

**Host-Centric Log Sources** are those that capture events that occurred on a host, such as tools like [[Sysmon]] or logging software like [[Windows Events Log]].
- Examples of host centric logs include user access to files, user authentication attempts, registry modifications, or any executions on the host.

**Network-Centric Log Sources** are those that generate logs when hosts communicate with each other or access some sort of network, like the internet. These communications take place using [[Protocol]]s.
- Examples of network centric logs include [[Secure Shell Protocol (SSH)]] connections, [[File Transfer Protocol (FTP)]] connections, [[HTTP]] web traffic, [[Virtual Private Network (VPN)]]s, or any network sharing activity.

Using **log consolidation**, the SOC team can identify incidents and events that threaten the security of the infrastructure.
- By centralizing and collecting information from these sources, threat detection and handling is made simpler by outlining patterns, tendencies, and highlighting outliers and irregularities.
- SIEMs also allow event correlation using the large amount of data gathered, searching through the logs, and investigations can be made using this data.

##### Threat Alerting

Possible threats that are observed by the SIEM's collection of logs are reported.
- This allows the security team to carry out fast investigations and respond to incidents quickly.

Using analytics carried out over the logs, combined with [[Cyber Threat Intelligence]] information, SIEMs can recognize potential threats and produce alerts.
- Alerts produced are accompanied with details that allows investigations to be conducted on this alert.

##### Contextualization & Response

SIEMs should not be generating a large number of alerts, as this not only overwhelms the security team, but is also an indicator of a large number of false positives.
- To tackle this issue, the alerts need to have enough context to allow easy sorting through these alerts.
- Having enough context allows teams to identify the potential threats and act on them. This context also aids in automating the process of handling these alerts.

---
### Data Flow

1. SIEM solutions ingest logs from various data sources. Each SIEM tool possesses unique capabilities for collecting logs from different sources. _This process is known as data ingestion or data collection._
2. The gathered data is processed and normalized to be understood by the SIEM correlation engine. The raw data must be written or read in a format that can be comprehended by the SIEM and converted into a common format from various types of datasets. _This process is called data normalization and data aggregation._
3. Finally, the most crucial part of SIEM, where SOC teams utilize the normalized data collected by the SIEM to create various detection rules, dashboards, visualizations, alerts, and incidents. This enables the SOC team to identify potential security risks and respond swiftly to security incidents.

##### Log Ingestion

This is the process by which logs are sent to the SIEM solution. There are several ways this can happen:
- *Agent / Forwarder*: An agent software is installed on the endpoint, and it is configured to capture all the important logs and send them to the SIEM server.
- *Syslog*: A [[Protocol]] that is used to collect data from various endpoints and systems and is then sent to the centralized SIEM.
- *Manual Upload*: Some SIEMs allow for data to be ingested offline by manual uploads.
- *Port Forwarding*: SIEMs can be configured to listen on a certain port, and endpoints are responsible for forwarding data and logs to the SIEM to that port.

---