### General Notes

_SIEM_ or _Security Information and Events Management_ is a software that possesses a large amount of functionalities:
- Collection and administration of logs and events.
- [[Incident Handling]].
- Visual summaries and documentation.

SIEM systems gather data from various resources, both on the network and outside of the network.
- This data is standardized and used for analysis.
- Experts who use the SIEM observe these logs and analysis and are able to locate and identify security issues or incidents.

An _alert_ is generated when an event or incident takes place that needs to be examined by the security professional.
- Alerts are generated in large amounts due to the large amount of logs generated by the events.
- Therefore, the SIEM must be fine tuned to only alert events that are deemed risky.

---
### SIEM Functions

By serving as a central hub that collects data from various sources, SIEM solutions offer a platform to easily and efficiently manage risks and handle incidents.

#### Log Aggregation and Normalization

A SIEM has responsibilities of collections logs of various types and from various sources, and normalizing them into a single standard format.
- This process of collecting logs from various sources is known as _log consolidating_.

Using log consolidation, the SOC team can identify incidents and events that threaten the security of the infrastructure.
- By centralizing and collecting information from these sources, threat detection and handling is made simpler by outlining patterns, tendencies, and highlighting outliers and irregularities.

#### Threat Alerting

Possible threats that are observed by the SIEM's collection of logs are reported.
- This allows the security team to carry out fast investigations and respond to incidents quickly.

Using analytics carried out over the logs, combined with [[Cyber Threat Intelligence]] information, SIEMs can recognize potential threats and produce alerts.
- Alerts produced are accompanied with details that allows investigations to be conducted on this alert.

#### Contextualization & Response

SIEMs should not be generating a large number of alerts, as this not only overwhelms the security team, but is also an indicator of a large number of false positives.
- To tackle this issue, the alerts need to have enough context to allow easy sorting through these alerts.
- Having enough context allows teams to identify the potential threats and act on them. This context also aids in automating the process of handling these alerts.

---
### Data Flow

1. SIEM solutions ingest logs from various data sources. Each SIEM tool possesses unique capabilities for collecting logs from different sources. _This process is known as data ingestion or data collection._
2. The gathered data is processed and normalized to be understood by the SIEM correlation engine. The raw data must be written or read in a format that can be comprehended by the SIEM and converted into a common format from various types of datasets. _This process is called data normalization and data aggregation._
3. Finally, the most crucial part of SIEM, where SOC teams utilize the normalized data collected by the SIEM to create various detection rules, dashboards, visualizations, alerts, and incidents. This enables the SOC team to identify potential security risks and respond swiftly to security incidents.

---